spec: add CLI notation certificate and key specs (#361)
notaryproject/notation: specs/commandline/certificate.md

  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority
```

### notation certificate show

```text
Show certificate details given trust store type, named store, and certificate file name. If the certificate file contains multiple certificates, then all certificates are displayed.

Usage:
  notation certificate show --type <type> --store <name> [flags] <cert_fileName>

Flags:
  -h, --help           help for show
  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority
```

### notation certificate delete

```text
Delete certificates from the trust store.

Usage:
  notation certificate delete --type <type> --store <name> [flags] (--all | <cert_fileName>)

Aliases:
  delete, rm

Flags:
  -a, --all            remove all certificates in the named store
  -h, --help           help for delete
  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority
  -y, --yes            do not prompt for confirmation
```

### notation certificate generate-test

```text
Generate a test RSA key and a corresponding self-signed certificate.

Usage:

>   notation certificate generate-test [flags] <host>

Reviewer: instead of `host`, can we just use `name` and remove `--name` flag? In code we are using host as common name of certificate Ref: https://github.com/notaryproject/notation-core-go/blob/b5df54c7465b0c1b177233108355b4e7314f1a14/testhelper/certificatetest.go#L166

Reviewer: Yes but how will this host information be useful? Is it more kind of a common-name for certificate? If so we should remove host and use name or common-name

Flags:
  -h, --help   help for certificate
```

### notation certificate add

```text
Add certificates to the trust store. This command only operates on User level.

Usage:
  notation certificate add --type <type> --store <name> [flags] <cert_path>...

Flags:
  -h, --help           help for add
  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority
```

### notation certificate list

```text
List certificates in the trust store. This command operates on both User level and System level.

Usage:
  notation certificate list [flags]

Aliases:
  list, ls

Flags:
  -h, --help           help for list
  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority
```

### notation certificate show

```text
Show certificate details given trust store type, named store, and certificate file name. If the certificate file contains multiple certificates, then all certificates are displayed. User level has priority over System level.

Usage:

>   notation certificate show --type <type> --store <name> [flags] <fileName>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  notation certificate show --type <type> --store <name> [flags] <cert_fileName>
```

Flags:
  -h, --help           help for show
  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority
```

### notation certificate delete

```text
Delete certificates from the trust store. This command only operates on User level.

Usage:

>   notation certificate delete --type <type> --store <name> [flags] (--all | <filename>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  notation certificate delete --type <type> --store <name> [flags] (--all | <cert_filename>)
```

# notation certificate

## Description

> Use ```notation certificate``` command to add/list/delete certificates in a trust store. Update an existing certificate is not allowed since the thumbprint will be inconsistent, which results in a new certificate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use ```notation certificate``` command to add/list/delete certificates in notation's trust store. Updating an existing certificate is not allowed since the thumbprint will be inconsistent, which results in a new certificate.
```

* `Certificate Authority`: The directory name is `ca`.
* `Signing Authority`: The directory name is `signingAuthority`

There could be more trust store types introduced in the future.

Here is an example of trust store directory structure:

```text
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/notation/truststore
    /x509
        /ca
            /acme-rockets
                cert1.pem
                cert2.pem
                  /sub-dir       # sub directory is ignored
                    cert-3.pem   # certs under sub directory is ignored

        /signingAuthority
            /wabbit-networks
                cert3.crt
```

In this example, there are two certificates stored in trust store named `acme-rockets` of type `ca`. There is one certificate stored in trust store named `wabbit-networks` of type `signingAuthority`.

Please be noted there will be user level trust store and system level trust store. See [Directory spec](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/main/specs/directory.md) for more details. The commands `notation certificate add` and `notation certificate delete` are performed only on user level trust store.

## Outline

### notation certificate

```text

> Manage certificates in trust store for signature verification

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Manage certificates in trust store for signature verification.
```

Usage:
  notation certificate [command]

Aliases:
  certificate, cert

Available Commands:
  add           Add certificates to the trust store. This command only operates on User level.
  delete        Delete certificates from the trust store. This command only operates on User level.
  generate-test Generate a test RSA key and a corresponding self-signed certificate.

>   list          List certificates used for verification. This command operates on User level and System level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  list          List certificates in the trust store. This command operates on both User level and System level.
```
Programmatically, this line has to align with the short description shown by 'notation certificate list -h'.

  show          Show certificate details given trust store type, named store, and certificate file name. If the certificate file contains multiple certificates, then all certificates are displayed. User level has priority over System level.

Flags:
  -h, --help   help for certificate

```

### notation certificate add

```text
Add certificates to the trust store. This command only operates on User level.

Usage:

>   notation certificate add --type <type> --store <name> [flags] <filepath...>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  notation certificate add --type <type> --store <name> [flags] <cert_path>...
```
To be consistent with below.

Flags:

>   -h, --help           help for certificate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  -h, --help           help for add
```

  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority

```

### notation certificate list

```text
List certificates in the trust store. This command operates on both User level and System level.

Usage:
  notation certificate list [flags]

Aliases:
  list, ls

Flags:
  -h, --help           help for list
  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority

```

### notation certificate show

```text

> Show certificate details given trust store type, named store, and certificate file name. If the certificate file contains a certificate chain, all certificates in the chain are displayed starting from the leaf. User level has priority over System level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Show certificate details given trust store type, named store, and certificate file name. If the certificate file contains multiple certificates, then all certificates are displayed. User level has priority over System level.
```
Again, programmatically, this has to align with the command description shown by 'notation cert -h'.

Usage:

>   notation certificate show -t <type> -s <name> [flags] <fileName>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  notation certificate show --type <type> --store <name> [flags] <cert_fileName>
```

Flags:
  -h, --help           help for show
  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority

```

### notation certificate delete

```text
Delete certificates from the trust store. This command only operates on User level.

Usage:

>   notation certificate delete -t <type> -s <name> [flags] (--all | <cert_filename>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  notation certificate delete --type <type> --store <name> [flags] (--all | <cert_fileName>)
```

Aliases:
  delete, rm

Flags:

>   -a, --all            remove all certificates in the named store
>   -y, --yes            do not prompt for confirmation
>   -h, --help           help for delete
>   -s, --store string   specify named store
>   -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  -a, --all            remove all certificates in the named store
  -h, --help           help for delete
  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority
  -y, --yes            do not prompt for confirmation
```

```bash
notation cert list --store <name>
```

Upon successful listing, all the certificate files in the trust store named `<name>` are printed out in a format of absolute filepath. If the listing fails, an error message is printed out with specific reasons. Nothing is printed out if the trust store is empty.

### List all certificate files of a certain type of store

```bash
notation cert list --type <type>
```

Upon successful listing, all the certificate files in the trust store of type `<type>` are printed out in a format of absolute filepath. If the listing fails, an error message is printed out with specific reasons. Nothing is printed out if the trust store is empty.

### List all certificate files of a certain named store of a certain type

```bash
notation cert list --type <type> --store <name>
```

Upon successful listing, all the certificate files in the trust store named `<name>` of type `<type>` are printed out in a format of absolute filepath. If the listing fails, an error message is printed out with specific reasons. Nothing is printed out if the trust store is empty.

### Show details of a certain certificate file

```bash

> notation cert show --type <type> --store <name> <cert_file_name>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
notation certificate show --type <type> --store <name> <cert_fileName>
```
To be consistent with above.

```

Upon successful show, the certificate details are printed out starting from leaf certificate if it's a certificate chain. Here is a list of certificate properties:

* Issuer
* Subject
* Valid from
* Valid to
* IsCA
* Thumbprints

If the showing fails, an error message is printed out with specific reasons.

### Delete all certificates of a certain named store of a certain type

```bash

> notation cert delete --type <type> --store <name> --all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
notation certificate delete --type <type> --store <name> --all
```

```

A prompt is showed asking user to confirm the deletion. Upon successful deletion, all certificates in trust store named `<name>` of type `<type>` are deleted. If deletion fails, a list of successful deleted certificate files is printed out as well as a list of deletion-failure certificates with specific reasons.

### Delete a specific certificate of a certain named store of a certain type

```bash

> notation cert delete --type <type> --store <name> <cert_file_name>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
notation certificate delete --type <type> --store <name> <cert_fileName>
```

# notation certificate

## Description

Use ```notation certificate``` command to add/list/delete certificates in a trust store. Update an existing certificate is not allowed since the thumbprint will be inconsistent, which results in a new certificate.

The trust store is in the format of a directory in the filesystem as`x509/<type>/<name>/*.crt|*.cer|*.pem`. Currently two types of trust store are supported:

* `Certificate Authority`: The directory name is `ca`.
* `Signing Authority`: The directory name is `signingAuthority`

There could be more trust store types introduced in the future.

Here is an example of trust store directory structure:

```text

> $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/notation/trust-store

Reviewer 4: nit: `truststore`, not `trust-store`

Author: The spec need to be updated as well.

    /x509
        /ca
            /acme-rockets
                cert1.pem
                cert2.pem
                  /sub-dir       # sub directory is ignored
                    cert-3.pem   # certs under sub directory is ignored

        /signingAuthority
            /wabbit-networks
                cert3.crt
```

In this example, there are two certificates stored in trust store named `acme-rockets` of type `ca`. There is one certificate stored in trust store named `wabbit-networks` of type `signingAuthority`.

> Please be noted there wil be user level trust store and system level trust store. See [Directory spec](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/main/specs/directory.md) for more details. The commands `notation certificate add` and `notation certificate delete` are performed only on user level trust store.

Reviewer 4: typo: will

* X509v3 Extended Key Usage

If the showing fails, an error message is printed out with specific reasons.

### Delete all certificates of a certain named store of a certain type

```bash
notation cert delete --type <type> --store <name> --all
```

A prompt is showed asking user to confirm the deletion. Upon successful deletion, all certificates in trust store named `<name>` of type `<type>` are deleted. If deletion fails, a list of successful deleted certificate files is printed out as well as a list of deletion-failure certificates with specific reasons.

### Delete a specific certificate of a certain named store of a certain type

```bash
notation cert delete --type <type> --store <name> <cert_file_name>
```

A prompt is showed asking user to confirm the deletion. Upon successful deletion, the specific certificate is deleted in trust store named `<name>` of type `<type>`. If deletion fails, an error message with specific reasons is printed out.

### Generate a local RSA key and a corresponding self-generated certificate for testing purpose and add the certificate into trust store

```bash
notation certificate generate-test "wabbit-networks.io" --trust
```

> Upon successful execution, a local key file and certificate file named `wabbit-networks.io` are generated and stored in `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/notation/localkeys/`. `wabbit-networks.io` is also used as certificate subject.CommonName. With `--trust` flag set, the certificate is added into a trust store named `wabbit-networks.io` of type `ca`.

Reviewer 4: do we need to specify the path to the truststore as well?

# notation certificate

## Description

Use ```notation certificate``` command to add/list/delete certificates in a trust store. Update an existing certificate is not allowed since the thumbprint will be inconsistent, which results in a new certificate.

The trust store is in the format of a directory in the filesystem as`x509/<type>/<name>/*.crt|*.cer|*.pem`. Currently two types of trust store are supported:

* `Certificate Authority`: The directory name is `ca`.

> * `Signing Authority`: The directory name is `signingAuthority`

Reviewer: Should we also account for tsa ?

https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/trust-store-trust-policy-specification.md#trust-store

Author: According to this spec, TSA based timestamping will not be available in rc.1, so it is not listed here.

```text
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/notation/truststore
    /x509
        /ca
            /acme-rockets
                cert1.pem
                cert2.pem
                  /sub-dir       # sub directory is ignored
                    cert-3.pem   # certs under sub directory is ignored

        /signingAuthority
            /wabbit-networks
                cert3.crt
```

In this example, there are two certificates stored in trust store named `acme-rockets` of type `ca`. There is one certificate stored in trust store named `wabbit-networks` of type `signingAuthority`.

Please be noted there will be user level trust store and system level trust store. See [Directory spec](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/blob/main/specs/directory.md) for more details. The commands `notation certificate add` and `notation certificate delete` are performed only on user level trust store.

## Outline

### notation certificate

```text
Manage certificates in trust store for signature verification

Usage:
  notation certificate [command]

Aliases:
  certificate, cert

Available Commands:
  add           Add certificates to the trust store. This command only operates on User level.

>   delete        Delete certificates from the trust store. This command only operates on User level.

Reviewer: Why are we restricting this command to user level?

Reviewer 2: > Why are we restricting this command to user level?

Users who are not admin should only have read permission on system level certs. Ideally, system level files should only be modified by admins of the machine.

  generate-test Generate a test RSA key and a corresponding self-signed certificate.
  list          List certificates used for verification. This command operates on User level and System level.

>   show          Show certificate details given trust store type, named store, and certificate file name. If the certificate file contains a certificate chain, all certificates in the chain are displayed starting from the leaf. User level has priority over System level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  show          Show certificate details given trust store type, named store, and certificate file name. If the certificate file contains multiple certificates then all certificates displayed. User level has priority over System level.
```

Flags:
  -h, --help   help for certificate

Global Flags:
      --plain-http   Registry access via plain HTTP

> ```

Reviewer: do we need this?

### notation certificate add

```text
Add certificates to the trust store. This command only operates on User level.

Usage:

>   notation certificate add --type <type> --store <name> <filepath...> [flags]

Reviewer 5: `[flags]` should be put before `<filepath...>`.

Reviewer 5: In general, flags should be put before arguments.

Flags:
  -h, --help   Help for certificate
  -s, --store string   Specify named store
  -t, --type string    Specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority

Global Flags:

>       --plain-http   Registry access via plain HTTP

Reviewer 5: The global flag is confusing since it is not related to `notation certificate`.

Aliases:
  list, ls

Flags:
  -h, --help           help for list
  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority

Global Flags:
      --plain-http   Registry access via plain HTTP
```

### notation certificate show

```text
Show certificate details given trust store type, named store, and certificate file name. If the certificate file contains a certificate chain, all certificates in the chain are displayed starting from the leaf. User level has priority over System level.

Usage:
  notation certificate show -t <type> -s <name> <fileName> [flags]

Flags:
  -h, --help           help for show
  -s, --store string   specify named store
  -t, --type string    specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority

Global Flags:
      --plain-http   Registry access via plain HTTP
```

### notation certificate delete

```text
Delete certificates from the trust store. This command only operates on User level.

Usage:
  notation certificate delete -t <type> -s <name> (--all | <cert_filename>) [flags]

Aliases:
  delete, rm

Flags:
  -a, --all            If set to true, remove all certificates in the named store

>   -y, --confirm        If yes, do not prompt for confirmation of deletion

Reviewer 5: This flag is inconsistent since `confirm` does not begin with `y`.

  -h, --help           help for delete
  -s, --store string   Specify named store
  -t, --type string    Specify trust store type, options: ca, signingAuthority

Global Flags:
      --plain-http   Registry access via plain HTTP
```

### notation certificate generate-test

```text
Generate a test RSA key and a corresponding self-signed certificate.

Usage:
  notation certificate generate-test <host> [flags]

Flags:
  -b, --bits int      RSA key bits (default 2048)
  -d, --default       mark as default
  -h, --help          help for generate-test
  -n, --name string   key and certificate name

>       --trust         add the generated certificate to the trust store

Reviewer 5: Since we have trust policy and trust store, we need to elaborate what `--trust` means.

Author: I think the description is clear for `--trust`. Do you mean we need to change the name of `--trust` for trust store only? For example `--trust-store`?

Author: This flag only adds the generated certificate to the trust stone, no operations on trust policy.

```

Upon successful listing, all the certificate files in the trust store named `<name>` are printed out in a format of absolute filepath. If the listing fails, an error message is printed out with specific reasons. Nothing is printed out if the trust store is empty.

### List all certificate files of a certain type of store

```bash
notation cert list --type <type>
```

Upon successful listing, all the certificate files in the trust store of type `<type>` are printed out in a format of absolute filepath. If the listing fails, an error message is printed out with specific reasons. Nothing is printed out if the trust store is empty.

### List all certificate files of a certain named store of a certain type

```bash
notation cert list --type <type> --store <name>
```

Upon successful listing, all the certificate files in the trust store named `<name>` of type `<type>` are printed out in a format of absolute filepath. If the listing fails, an error message is printed out with specific reasons. Nothing is printed out if the trust store is empty.

### Show details of a certain certificate file

```bash
notation cert show --type <type> --store <name> <cert_file_name>
```

> Upon successful show, the certificate details are printed out starting from leaf certificate if it's a certificate chain. Here is a list of certificate properties:

Reviewer 5: Missing the following attributes:
- Fingerprints / Thumbprints

* Issuer
* Subject
* Valid from
* Valid to

> * version

Reviewer: This can be removed as its not commonly used.

* Serial Number
* Signature Algorithm

> * Public Key Algorithm

Reviewer: This can be removed as its not commonly used.

> * Subject Public Key Info

Reviewer: Do we need this?

Reviewer: We should also add sha1 and sha256 hash (commonly used to identify certificate)

> * X509v3 Key Usage: critical

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* X509v3 Key Usage
```

* X509v3 Extended Key Usage

> * Basic Constraints Valid

Reviewer: Do we need this?
